Recognizing whether you are asking
an inferential question or
a prediction question is really important.
Because the type of question that you are
asking can greatly influence the modeling
strategy that you pursue
in any data analysis.
So just to recap, with inferential
questions the goal is to estimate
the association between an outcome and
a key predictor.
While potentially trying to adjust for
all these confounding factors.
There is usually a very small number,
or even a single
key predictor that we're interested in and
it's relationship to the outcome.
And then there may be all
these other variables.
And the key goals for the modeling
is to estimate this association and
to make sure that you appropriately
adjust for any other kinda factors.
You often do sensitivity analyses to
see how the association might change
in the presence of other factors.
With the prediction question,
the goal is to develop a model that
best predicts the outcome using whatever
information you have available to you.
So typically you don't put any [FOREIGN]
weight on one predictor over another.
And so there's no notion of let's
say a key predictor and confounder.
All the predictors might be equally
important before you look at the data.
And any good prediction algorithm
will tell you which predictors or
which variables are more or
less important for predicting the outcome.
But beforehand,
we don't necessarily divide them into
different groups based on importance.
Finally, we usually don't care
about the mechanism or the specific
details of the relationships between
the various predictors or variables.
We just wanna find a kind of a model form
that predicts the outcome with
a high accuracy and low error.
So I wanted to give a brief
example of how these different
types of questions can lead to different
conclusions, even on the same dataset.
I'll start first with
an inferential question.
Suppose I want to know how is air
pollution in New York City related to
mortality in New York City.
Okay?
So the data I'm gonna use comes
from this national morbidity and
mortality in air pollution study, and
here's a picture of daily mortality
in New York from 2001 to 2005.
And you can see that it has
highly seasonal components,
the mortality tends to be higher in
the winter and lower in the summer, and
it's very specific to kind of
to pattern across every year.
Here is what particulate
matter data looks like.
And so for
the same time period you can see this
has also a seasonal structure to it.
In particular,
particulate matter is high in the summer.
It tends to be low in
the winter in New York City.
That's a very, that pattern is
kind of repeated across the years.
So the first step I'm gonna do is
just to try the easy solution.
The easiest solution is just
a scatter plot of mortality and
PM10 on the x-axis, and here you can
see what the relationship looks like.
There's quite a bit of noise because
we wouldn't necessarily expect
particulate matter to explain all
the vulnerability in mortality.
And so,
we may need to resort to some modeling,
some formal modeling to see if
there's any sort of association here.
So the first thing we're going to
do is to take that scatter plot and
just fit a simple linear aggression
to the data in that scatter plot.
This is basically regressing mortality as
the outcome and PM10 as our key predictor,
without any other factors,
just as kind of a baseline model.
Now here are the results that we get
from a regression model of that nature.
And you can see that the coefficient for
PM10 here is 0.00004, etc.
And so basically is close to zero.
You can tell by the size
of the standard error,
which is much bigger than the estimate,
that there's a lot of
variability around this estimate and
so it's effectively zero.
The association between
the two variables is zero.
Okay.
So
that's kind of what our basic
first cut analysis tells us.
Now one thing we know about pollution and
mortality,
just from the pictures that we just saw of
the data is that they're highly seasonal.
Season plays a big role in explaining
variability in both mortality and
in air pollution okay?
Remember mortality was high in
the winter and low in the summer, and
pollution was high in the summer and
low in the winter.
So it seems like season is clearly
related to both mortality and pollution.
So it might be a reasonable thing to
include as a potential confounding factor.
So we can fit a secondary
model to the data,
which includes pm10 as our key predictor,
and
then maybe we'll include the season of the
year as a potential confounding factor,
so the season will just be, you know,
there'll be four seasons, and
we'll have a categorical value
with a category for each season.
So, here is the results of
fitting that model to the data.
And you can see that I
highlighted the coefficient for
pm10 here is actually quite a bit
larger now, is 0.00149, and you
can see that the standard error is quite
a bit smaller relative to the estimate.
So, this suggests that the coefficient for
pm10 is quite a bit bigger than zero,
maybe statistically significant.
So the addition of this confounding factor
dramatically changed the association
we estimate between pm10 and mortality.
And so, part of this is because season
is very strongly related to both,
but it's kind of positive,
it's correlated in one way with mortality,
but it's correlated in
a different way with pollution.
That's part of why we saw it when
we didn't include season we saw no
relationship.
But when we do include it, we see this
kinda quite a bit stronger relationship.
Now there are other potential
factors that we might wanna consider
in terms of things that might both be
related to mortality and to air pollution.
So another one is the weather.
Right?
So weather is associated with mortality
and it's also highly associated
with various air pollutants and so
we can characterize the weather with
something like temperature or dew point
temperature to think to just capture
a piece of kind of what weather is and so
we can include that into our model.
So here's the results of including
temperature which is the tmpd variable and
dew-point temperature which
is the dptp variable.
And you can see now.
And actually I've highlighted
the coefficient for pm10,
it's even bigger than it was before and
the standard error is similar, so it's
actually more statistically significant in
some sense than in the previous models.
Again, temperature and
dew point are strong factors that are
related to both mortality and pollution.
Finally, another type of factor that may
be related to both mortality and PM,
particulate matter,
is other pollutants, right?
So there are other pollutants that may
affect health, and they may be correlated
with particulate matter because
they may share common sources.
So, one common source in a city
like New York is gonna be traffic.
Traffic can produce particles,
it can also produce other pollutants.
So one of the pollutants that
we'll look at is nitrogen dioxide.
And so nitrogen dioxide tends
to be correlated with particles.
So if you are interested in
association between particles and
mortality, you might
wonder well is what we're
seeing actually the association between
nitrogen dioxide and mortality?
And pm10 is kind of getting
mixed up in the two.
And so we can include nitrogen
dioxide in our model as a potential
confounding factor, and
see how the estimate for
particulate matter
changes when we do that.
So here are the results from that model,
and
you can see that compared to
the previous model the coefficient for
pm10 drops a little bit,
it goes down a little bit, so
the effect weakens a little bit when we
include nitrogen dioxide in the model.
Now it's still quite a strong effect,
relative to the standard error that
we estimate but it's not estimate,
that is not as strong as it was before we
entered, we included no2 in the model.
And so, no2 and pm10 might be sharing
a lot of the same effect on mortality and
it may be difficult to
completely disentangle them.
However, even with no2 in the model
we still see a reasonably strong
association between pm10 and
mortality in New York City.
So when we put all these results
together from the primary model which
just had pm10 in mortality, and then
the various secondary models we've shown,
you can see that the primary model had
a zero association effectively, and
then the other three models
had a relatively strong
positive association with the outcome.
And here I've plotted the 95% confidence
intervals for each of these associations.
So this is the kind of analysis
that we're interested in.
We're looking at pm10
as our key predictor.
And mortality is our outcome.
And we want to see how that association
changes under different scenarios.
Under different sets of models, including
different sets of confounding factors.
Now what we do with this information will
depend on what the goal of the analysis
is, who the stakeholders are, and what we
might do with this information afterwards.
But we won't talk about that now.
The point I want to make is the kind
of the analysis that you do for
an associational type of analysis
is very much along these lines.
So another question that we could ask,
is what best
predicts mortality in New York City, using
the data that we have available, okay?
So now I've changed the question to
a prediction type of question, and
we want to know what
predicts the outcome best.
So one of the things that we could
do is fit a complex prediction
algorithm, all right?
We don't need to know, we don't need to
worry about estimating associations, or
adjusting for confounding factors.
We're just gonna put all the data
that we have available to us and
see how well that predicts
the outcome mortality.
So here I'm gonna use a random
force algorithm to make
predictions of mortality in New York City.
And one of the aspects of random
forest algorithm is that it allows for
a summary statistic called
variable importance.
And this gives you a sense of how
important a variable is in increasing
the skill of the algorithm
in predicting the outcome.
So, I've plotted here,
the variable importance plot that rank
orders all the variables in terms of how
important they are to improving
the prediction skill of the algorithm.
And you can see at the very
top here is temperature,
which is kind of ranked as
the most important variable.
Followed by dew-point temperature,
followed by the date, and
then no2, ozone which is o3.
Season.
And then finally, pm10 and then dow,
which is the day of the week.
So you can see that from
this prediction model,
particularly matter actually
is second from the bottom
in terms of improving the prediction
skill of the algorithm.
So if you were to look
at this analysis and
then ask the original question, and
say, how is pm10 related to mortality?
You might think well,
it's not related to mortality.
It's not important for predicting.
But that's true, but it doesn't
necessarily mean that pm10 is not
associated with mortality,
from an associational standpoint.
It may have an important
association with mortality.
But that the association
is inherently weak.
And so it's not necessarily going to be
good for be predicting the outcome, but
it may, nevertheless, have an important
association with the outcome.
And so, separating these kinds of
questions out, and the goals of these
questions is very important because if you
were to ask an inferential question, but
then do an analysis that's really tuned
for prediction you might be lead to
come to the wrong conclusion that,
oh, pm10 is not important.
And it doesn't have an important
association with the outcome.
And particularly, if you think about
something like pollution, it may have
an inherently very small association with
the outcome, but because everyone in
New York City ostensibly breathes,
and is exposed to this polluted air.
The effect, the ultimate effect,
of such an association,
could be quite large given the large
population of a city like New York.
So it's important to not kind of conflate
the magnitude of the association
with the ultimate effect on
the population that you're interested in.
Using prediction algorithms for
prediction questions, and
associational analyses for associational
questions, is really important so
that you can draw the right
conclusions from your data, and
not mistake the results of
one question for another.
So framing the question correctly
is really important for developing
an important modeling strategy, and for
kinda drawing the right conclusions.